Paul, called by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus, and our brother Sosthenes,
To the church of God that is in Corinth, 
to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, 
called to be saints together with all those who in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
both their Lord and ours:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I give thanks to my God always for you because of the grace of God that was given you in Christ Jesus, 
that in every way you were enriched in him in all speech and all knowledge— 
even as the testimony about Christ was confirmed among you— 
so that you are not lacking in any gift, 
as you wait for the revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who will sustain you to the end, 
guiltless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
God is faithful, 
by whom you were called into the fellowship of his Son, 
Jesus Christ our Lord.
I appeal to you, brothers,
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that all of you agree, 
and that there be no divisions among you, 
but that you be united in the same mind and the same judgment. 
For it has been reported to me by Chloe's people that there is quarreling among you, 
my brothers. 
What I mean is that each one of you says, 
“I follow Paul,” or “I follow Apollos,” or “I follow Cephas,” or “I follow Christ.” 
Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? 
Or were you baptized in the name of Paul? 
I thank God that I baptized none of you except Crispus and Gaius, 
so that no one may say that you were baptized in my name. 
(I did baptize also the household of Stephanas. Beyond that, I do not know whether I baptized anyone else.) 
For Christ did not send me to baptize but to preach the gospel, 
and not with words of eloquent wisdom, 
lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power.
For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. 
For it is written,
“I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
and the discernment of the discerning I will thwart.”
Where is the one who is wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this age? 
Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? 
For since, in the wisdom of God, the world did not know God through wisdom, 
it pleased God through the folly of what we preach to save those who believe. 
For Jews demand signs and Greeks seek wisdom, 
but we preach Christ crucified, 
a stumbling block to Jews and folly to Gentiles, 
but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, 
Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. 
For the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men.

For consider your calling, brothers: not many of you were wise according to worldly standards,
not many were powerful, not many were of noble birth. 
But God chose what is foolish in the world to shame the wise; 
God chose what is weak in the world to shame the strong; 
God chose what is low and despised in the world, 
even things that are not, 
to bring to nothing things that are, 
so that no human being might boast in the presence of God. 
And because of him you are in Christ Jesus, 
who became to us wisdom from God, 
righteousness and sanctification and redemption, 
so that, as it is written, 
“Let the one who boasts, boast in the Lord.”

And I, when I came to you, brothers,
did not come proclaiming to you the testimony of God with lofty speech or wisdom. 
For I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and him crucified. 
And I was with you in weakness and in fear and much trembling, 
and my speech and my message were not in plausible words of wisdom, 
but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power, 
so that your faith might not rest in the wisdom of men but in the power of God.

Yet among the mature we do impart wisdom, 
although it is not a wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, 
who are doomed to pass away. 
But we impart a secret and hidden wisdom of God, 
which God decreed before the ages for our glory. 
None of the rulers of this age understood this, 
for if they had, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 
But, as it is written,
“What no eye has seen, nor ear heard,
    nor the heart of man imagined,
what God has prepared for those who love him”—

these things God has revealed to us through the Spirit. 
For the Spirit searches everything, even the depths of God. 
For who knows a person's thoughts except the spirit of that person, which is in him? 
So also no one comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God. 
Now we have received not the spirit of the world, 
but the Spirit who is from God, 
that we might understand the things freely given us by God. 
And we impart this in words not taught by human wisdom but taught by the Spirit, 
interpreting spiritual truths to those who are spiritual.

The natural person does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, 
for they are folly to him, 
and he is not able to understand them because they are spiritually discerned. 
The spiritual person judges all things, 
but is himself to be judged by no one. 
“For who has understood the mind of the Lord so as to instruct him?” 
But we have the mind of Christ.

But I, brothers, could not address you as spiritual people, 
but as people of the flesh, as infants in Christ. 
I fed you with milk, 
not solid food, 
for you were not ready for it. 
And even now you are not yet ready, 
for you are still of the flesh. 
For while there is jealousy and strife among you, 
are you not of the flesh and behaving only in a human way? 
For when one says, “I follow Paul,” and another, “I follow Apollos,” 
are you not being merely human?
What then is Apollos? What is Paul? Servants through whom you believed, as the Lord assigned to each. 
I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the growth. 
So neither he who plants nor he who waters is anything, 
but only God who gives the growth. 
He who plants and he who waters are one, 
and each will receive his wages according to his labor. 
For we are God's fellow workers. 
You are God's field, 
God's building.
According to the grace of God given to me, like a skilled master builder I laid a foundation, 
and someone else is building upon it. 
Let each one take care how he builds upon it. 
For no one can lay a foundation other than that which is laid, 
which is Jesus Christ. 
Now if anyone builds on the foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw— 
each one's work will become manifest, 
for the Day will disclose it, 
because it will be revealed by fire, 
and the fire will test what sort of work each one has done. 
If the work that anyone has built on the foundation survives, 
he will receive a reward. 
If anyone's work is burned up, 
he will suffer loss, 
though he himself will be saved, 
but only as through fire.

Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit dwells in you? 
If anyone destroys God's temple, 
God will destroy him. 
For God's temple is holy, and you are that temple.
Let no one deceive himself. 
If anyone among you thinks that he is wise in this age, 
let him become a fool that he may become wise. 
For the wisdom of this world is folly with God. For it is written, 
“He catches the wise in their craftiness,” 
and again, “The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are futile.” 
So let no one boast in men. For all things are yours, 
whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or the present or the future—all are yours, 
and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's.
This is how one should regard us, as servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God. 
Moreover, it is required of stewards that they be found faithful. 
But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged by you or by any human court. 
In fact, I do not even judge myself. 
For I am not aware of anything against myself, 
but I am not thereby acquitted. It is the Lord who judges me. 
Therefore do not pronounce judgment before the time, 
before the Lord comes, 
who will bring to light the things now hidden in darkness and will disclose the purposes of the heart. 
Then each one will receive his commendation from God.

I have applied all these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit, brothers,
that you may learn by us not to go beyond what is written, 
that none of you may be puffed up in favor of one against another. 
For who sees anything different in you? 
What do you have that you did not receive? 
If then you received it, 
why do you boast as if you did not receive it?

Already you have all you want! 
Already you have become rich! 
Without us you have become kings! 
And would that you did reign, 
so that we might share the rule with you! 
For I think that God has exhibited us apostles as last of all, 
like men sentenced to death, 
because we have become a spectacle to the world, 
to angels, and to men. 
We are fools for Christ's sake, 
but you are wise in Christ. 
We are weak, but you are strong. 
You are held in honor, but we in disrepute. 
To the present hour we hunger and thirst, 
we are poorly dressed and buffeted and homeless, 
and we labor, working with our own hands. 
When reviled, we bless; 
when persecuted, we endure; 
when slandered, we entreat. 
We have become, and are still, 
like the scum of the world, 
the refuse of all things.

I do not write these things to make you ashamed, 
but to admonish you as my beloved children. 
For though you have countless guides in Christ, 
you do not have many fathers. 
For I became your father in Christ Jesus through the gospel. 
I urge you, then, be imitators of me. 
That is why I sent you Timothy, 
my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, 
to remind you of my ways in Christ,
as I teach them everywhere in every church.
Some are arrogant, as though I were not coming to you. 
But I will come to you soon, 
if the Lord wills, 
and I will find out not the talk of these arrogant people but their power. 
For the kingdom of God does not consist in talk but in power. 
What do you wish? 
Shall I come to you with a rod, 
or with love in a spirit of gentleness?

It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, 
and of a kind that is not tolerated even among pagans, 
for a man has his father's wife.
And you are arrogant! 
Ought you not rather to mourn? 
Let him who has done this be removed from among you.

For though absent in body, 
I am present in spirit; and as if present, 
I have already pronounced judgment on the one who did such a thing. 
When you are assembled in the name of the Lord Jesus and my spirit is present, 
with the power of our Lord Jesus, 
you are to deliver this man to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 
so that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.

Your boasting is not good. 
Do you not know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump? 
Cleanse out the old leaven that you may be a new lump, 
as you really are unleavened. 
For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed. 
Let us therefore celebrate the festival, 
not with the old leaven, 
the leaven of malice and evil, 
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

I wrote to you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people— 
not at all meaning the sexually immoral of this world, 
or the greedy and swindlers, or idolaters, 
since then you would need to go out of the world. 
But now I am writing to you not to associate with anyone who bears the name of brother if he is guilty of sexual immorality or greed, 
or is an idolater, reviler, drunkard, or swindler—not even to eat with such a one. 
For what have I to do with judging outsiders? 
Is it not those inside the church whom you are to judge? 
God judges those outside. 
“Purge the evil person from among you.”

end of ch 5


... I will show you a still more excellent way.
    1. If I 
        1. speak in the tongues of men and of angels, 
            but have not love, 
                I am a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal. 
    2. And if I have 
        a. prophetic powers, and 
        b. understand 
            I. all mysteries and 
            II. all knowledge, 
    2.5. and if I have 
        c. all faith, 
            so as to remove mountains, 
            but have not love, 
                I am nothing. 
    4. If I 
        give away all I have, 
        and if I deliver up my body to be burned, 
            but have not love, 
                I gain nothing.

    Love is =
        1. patient and 
        2. kind; 
            love does not !=
                1. envy or 
                2. boast; 
it is not !=
    arrogant or 
    rude. 
            It does not !=
                insist on its own way; 
it is not !=
    irritable or 
    resentful;
            it does not !=
                rejoice at wrongdoing, 
            but =
                rejoices with the truth. 
    Love =
        bears all things, 
        believes all things,
        hopes all things, 
        endures all things.

((is: patient, kind))
((does: rejoice with the truth, 
bear, believe, hope and endure all things))

((is not: arrogant, rude, irritable or resentful))
((does not: envy, boast, insist on its own way, rejoice in wrongdoing))

Love never ends. 
As for prophecies, they will pass away; 
as for tongues, they will cease; 
as for knowledge, it will pass away. 
For we know in part and we prophesy in part, 
but when the perfect comes, the partial will pass away.

When I was a child, 
I spoke like a child, 
I thought like a child, 
I reasoned like a child. 
When I became a man, 
I gave up childish ways. 
For now we see in a mirror dimly, 
but then face to face. 
Now I know in part; 
then I shall know fully, 
even as I have been fully known.

So now faith, hope, and love abide, these three; 
but the greatest of these is love.